Mental health
Skip to main content
Overview
Mental health is a state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realize their abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their community. It has intrinsic and instrumental value and is integral to our well-being.
At any one time, a diverse set of individual, family, community and structural factors may combine to protect or undermine mental health. Although most people are resilient, people who are exposed to adverse circumstances – including poverty, violence, disability and inequality – are at higher risk of developing a mental health condition.
Many mental health conditions can be effectively treated at relatively low cost, yet health systems remain significantly under-resourced and treatment gaps are wide all over the world. Mental health care is often poor in quality when delivered. People with mental health conditions often also experience stigma, discrimination and human rights violations.
Impact
Mental health conditions include mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities as well as other mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning or risk of self-harm.
In 2019, 970 million people globally were living with a mental disorder, with anxiety and depression the most common.
Mental health conditions can cause difficulties in all aspects of life, including relationships with family, friends and community. They can result from or lead to problems at school and at work.
Globally, mental disorders account for 1 in 6 years lived with disability. People with severe mental health conditions die 10 to 20 years earlier than the general population. And having a mental health condition increases the risk of suicide and experiencing human rights violations.
The economic consequences of mental health conditions are also enormous, with productivity losses significantly outstripping the direct costs of care.
WHO Response
All WHO Member States are committed to implementing the
Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
, which aims to improve mental health by strengthening governance, providing community-based care, implementing promotion and prevention strategies, and strengthening information systems, evidence and research.
WHO’s
World mental health report: transforming mental health for all
called on all countries to accelerate progress towards implementing the action plan by deepening the value given to mental health, prioritizing mental health promotion and prevention, and developing networks of community-based services.
In 2019, WHO launched the
WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health (2019–2023): Universal Health Coverage for Mental Health
to ensure access to quality and affordable mental health care for 100 million more people in 12 priority countries.
WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP)
similarly aims to scale up services for mental, neurological and substance use disorders, especially in low- and middle-income countries.
As part of the
QualityRights
Initiative, WHO has developed a comprehensive package of training and guidance materials to build capacity in implementing a human rights and recovery approach to mental health care.
Fact sheets
Anxiety disorders
Bipolar disorder
Depressive disorder (depression)
Mental disorders
Mental health
Mental health at work
Mental health in emergencies
Mental health of adolescents
Mental health of older adults
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Refugee and migrant mental health
Schizophrenia
Suicide
Questions and answers
Mental health: Promoting and protecting human rights
Stress
Suicide
Databases and tools
Global Burden of Disease: Results Tool
Global Health Estimates
Mental Health Atlas
Suicide data
WHO MiNDbank
Initiatives and groups
LIVE LIFE Initiative for Suicide Prevention
mhGAP programme
QualityRights
Special Initiative for Mental Health
Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use (STAG-MNS)
WHO/UNICEF Helping Adolescents Thrive Initiative
WHO/UNICEF Joint Programme on Mental Health and Psychosocial Well-being and Development of Children and Adolescents
Resolutions and decisions
WHA74.14: Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
Technical work
Department of Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
News
All →
17 June 2026
Departmental update
WHO Step-by-Step programme recognized as a promising innovation for mental health in humanitarian settings
3 June 2026
Departmental update
WHO invites manufacturers to submit medicines for prequalification to expand treatment for substance use disorders
1 June 2026
Departmental update
WHO launches new guide to help scale psychological self-help
20 May 2026
Note for Media
Seventy-ninth World Health Assembly – Daily update: 20 May 2026
Latest publications
All →
1 June 2026
Psychological self-help interventions: delivering self-help for individuals, featuring Step-by-Step and...
This web annex accompanies the Psychological self-help interventions manual and provides the full content and implementation instructions for Step-by-Step...
Download
Read More
1 June 2026
Psychological self-help interventions: delivering self-help for individuals, featuring Step-by-Step and...
Individually delivered psychological self-help interventions are an evidence-based and scalable approach to expanding access to effective mental health...
Download
Read More
26 May 2026
WHO practical manual on meningitis diagnosis, treatment and care
The global burden of acute bacterial meningitis remains high, particularly in low- and middle-income countries and resource-limited settings. Following...
Download
Read More
20 May 2026
Group Problem Management Plus (PM+) psychological intervention: training manual
This training manual is for people or organizations wanting to train helpers to deliver Group Problem Management Plus (PM+). It contains all the information...
Download
Read More
Our work
Advocating for national suicide prevention strategies
Strengthening surveillance of suicide and self-harm
Monitoring and sharing suicide data and statistics
Promoting rights-based policy & law for mental health
Ensuring a coordinated and effective mental health response in emergencies
Scaling up care for mental, neurological, and substance use disorders: mhGAP
Improving the mental and brain health of children and adolescents
Feature stories
All →
10 December 2025
Community mental health services transform patients’ access to care in Barbados
5 December 2025
Helping countries build resilient mental health systems before and during emergencies
24 November 2025
Ukraine’s resilience during war time to strengthen primary health care
23 October 2025
Cross-country learning to strengthen systems for children and young people’s mental health.
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Argentina achievements summary poster
Infographic
WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health - Cambodia 2026
Infographic
WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health - Ghana 2026
Infographic
WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health - Jordan 2026
Videos
All →
1 July 2026
Aust-NZ Mental Health Assoc., Int. Mental Health Conference June 2026
19 June 2026
Essential but Unavailable: Medicines for Mental Health (WHO SIMH)
30 April 2026
The SbS app is free and accessible to use, providing the mental health support you need
30 April 2026
Step-by-Step is a free, self-help, mental health support programme delivered through an app or website.
Event
Third International Dialogue on Sustainable Financing for NCDs and Mental Health
2 – 4 September 2026
Webinar: Launch of the WHO Guidelines on risk reduction of cognitive decline and dementia, second edition
16 July 2026 15:30 – 17:00 CET
Seventy-ninth
Strategic Roundtables: Seventy-ninth World Health Assembly
19 – 21 May 2026
Campaigns
World Mental Health Day
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Conditions
Depression
Diseases and conditions
Epilepsy
Health interventions
Suicide prevention