Suicide
Skip to main content
Suicide
18 September 2024 | Questions and answers
How many people die by suicide every year?
Suicide is a global public health problem. Every year more than 720 000 people die as a result of suicide. The majority of these deaths (73%) occur in low- and middle-income countries. Beyond this, suicide has a ripple effect that impacts on societies, communities, friends and families who have lost a loved one to suicide.
How many people attempt suicide every year?
There are indications that for each person who dies of suicide there are likely to be more than 20 others who attempt suicide. This ratio differs widely by country, region, sex, age and method.
Are suicides preventable?
Access to emotional support at the right time and restricting access to highly lethal means of suicide to buy time while dealing with suicidal feelings can prevent suicide. Effective interventions exist.
WHO’s LIVE LIFE
approach recommends four key interventions which have proven to be effective:
limit access to the means of suicide (e.g., restrictions on toxic pesticides and      firearms);
interact with the media for responsible reporting of suicide;
foster socio-emotional life skills in adolescents; and
early identification, assessment, management and follow up of anyone who is      affected by suicidal behaviours.
The foundational pillars of the interventions for suicide prevention are situation analysis, multisectoral collaboration, awareness raising, capacity building, financing, surveillance, monitoring and evaluation.
Does talking about suicide lead to someone taking their own life?
Talking openly about suicide can give a person other options or the time to rethink his/her decision, thereby preventing suicide.
If someone is feeling suicidal, are they determined to end their own life?
Studies suggest that people who are suicidal are often ambivalent about living or dying and they look for relief from their pain. Someone may act impulsively and die a few days later, even though they would have liked to live on. Access to emotional support at the right time may prevent suicide. Studies with individuals who have made near-fatal suicide attempts indicate that many of them are pleased later on that they survived.
Is it true that only people with mental health conditions are suicidal?
Many people who are suicidal do not have a mental health condition, and many people with mental health conditions do not have a wish to die. In suicidal crisis situations, many underlying and contributing factors need to be considered – such as acute emotional distress, chronic pain, experience of violence and social determinants.
What causes people to be suicidal?
Suicidal behaviours are not easy to explain. They are never the result of a single factor or event. The factors that lead individuals to take their own life are multiple and complex. Health, mental health, stressful life events, and social and cultural factors need to be considered when trying to understand suicidal behaviour.
Do you feel like life is not worth living?
Do you feel like life is not worth living?
If you have experienced thoughts of suicide or self-harm, read on...
Are you experiencing any of the following?
Pain that seems overwhelming and unbearable.
Feelings of worthlessness or hopelessness.
Loneliness.
Constant negative thoughts.
Difficulty imagining any way to deal with your problems other than suicide.
The feeling that everyone would be better off without you.
Difficulty understanding why you are thinking or feeling this way.
What you need to know
You are not alone. Many people have gone through what you're experiencing and found help.
It's okay to talk about suicide. Talking can help alleviate some of the feelings you're experiencing.
Experiencing thoughts of suicide or self-harm is a sign of severe emotional distress.
Thinking about suicide is not a weakness and nothing to feel guilty about.
You can get better.
Help is available.
What you can do
Talk to someone you trust about how you feel.
Talk to a health worker, such as a doctor or mental health professional, or a counsellor or social worker.
Join a support group.
If you think you're in immediate danger of harming yourself, contact the emergency services or a crisis line.
Share this as an infographic
Do you know someone who may be considering suicide?
Do you know someone who may be considering suicide?
It's not uncommon to think about taking your own life. If you're worried about someone, read on...
What you should know
It's 0K to talk about suicide.
Asking someone if they are thinking about suicide does not make them act on their feelings. In fact, it often reduces anxiety and helps people feel understood.
Warning signs
Severe mood changes.
Social withdrawal.
Expressing thoughts, feelings or plans about ending their life.
Saying things like "No-one will miss me when I'm gone" or "I've got no reason to live."
Looking for ways to kill themselves.
Saying goodbye to close family members and friends.
Giving away valued possessions.
Who is at risk?
People who have tried to take their own life before.
People in acute emotional distress or with depression.
Someone who's socially isolated.
Someone with alcohol or drug problems.
People living with chronic pain or illness.
People who have experienced violence, abuse or other trauma.
People from groups of society that are marginalized or discriminated against.
What you can do
Find an appropriate time and a quiet place to talk with the person you are worried about. Let them know that you are there to listen.
Encourage them to seek help from a health worker, such as a doctor or mental health professional, or a counsellor or social worker. And offer to accompany them to an appointment.
If you think someone is in immediate danger, don't leave them alone. Contact the emergency services, a crisis line, a health worker or a family member.
If the person you're worried about lives with you, make sure they don't have access to means of self-harm at home.
Check in regularly to see how they're doing.
Share this as an infographic
WHO TEAM
Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use (MSD)
Related
Fact sheet: Suicide
Suicide prevention
International Association for Suicide Prevention (IASP)
Fact sheets
Suicide
25 March 2025