Depression
Skip to main content
Overview
Depressive disorder, or depression, is a common mental health condition that can happen to anyone. It is characterized by a low mood or loss of pleasure or interest in activities for long periods of time.
This is different from regular mood changes and feelings about everyday life. Depressive episodes last most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks. People with depression may experience disturbed sleep and changes to their appetite. They may have feelings of low self-worth, thoughts about dying and hopelessness about the future. Tiredness and poor concentration are also common.
Depression results from a complex interaction of social, psychological and biological factors. People who have lived through abuse, severe losses or other adverse events are more likely to develop depression. Problems at school and work can also result in depression.
Prevention programmes have been shown to reduce depression. There are also effective psychological treatments and medications for depression. However, these are often absent or inaccessible, especially in low- and middle-income countries. It is estimated that more than 75% of people experiencing mental disorders in low- and middle-income countries receive no treatment.
Impact
In 2019, an estimated 280 million people, including 5% of all adults, experienced depression. Depression is more common among women than men. Worldwide, more than 10% of pregnant women and women who have just given birth experience depression.
Depression can cause difficulties in all aspects of life, including performance at school, productivity at work, relationships with family, friends and community.
Researchers estimate that 12 billion productive work days are lost every year to depression and anxiety alone, at a cost of nearly US$ 1 trillion.
People with depression are at increased risk of suicide. Research also shows strong relationships between depression and physical health, including cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes and respiratory diseases.
WHO response
WHO works with Member States and partners to reduce the burden of mental health conditions, including depression. The
Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2030
highlights the steps required to provide appropriate interventions for people with mental health conditions, including depression.
Depression and self-harm/suicide are among the priority conditions covered by
WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP)
. The programme aims to help countries increase services for people with depression and other disorders through care provided by non-specialist health workers in primary health care.
WHO has developed effective brief psychological intervention manuals for depression that may be delivered by non-specialists to individuals and groups. Examples include
Problem Management Plus
,
Group Interpersonal Therapy (IPT) for depression
,
Thinking Healthy
, and the online self-help
Step-by-Step programme
.
Self-care and managing stress can also play an important role in promoting overall well-being and WHO has developed the self-help guide
Doing What Matters in Times of Stress
.
Fact sheets
Mental health
Depressive disorder (depression)
Suicide
Mental disorders
Databases and tools
Global Burden of Disease: Results Tool
WHO STEPwise approach to NCD risk factor surveillance
Campaign materials suicide prevention
Initiatives and groups
LIVE LIFE Initiative for Suicide Prevention
Special Initiative for Mental Health
Resolutions and decisions
WHA74.14: Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
Technical work
Department of Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
Innovations in psychological interventions
News
2 September 2025
News release
Over a billion people living with mental health conditions – services require urgent scale-up
19 September 2022
Departmental update
Launch of the WHO guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services
30 March 2017
News release
"Depression: let’s talk" says WHO, as depression tops list of causes of ill health
13 April 2016
News release
Investing in treatment for depression and anxiety leads to fourfold return
Latest publications
All →
1 September 2025
WHO guideline on HIV service delivery
This WHO guideline recommends integrating services for hypertension, diabetes, and mental health (including depression, anxiety, and substance use) into...
Download
Read More
19 September 2022
WHO guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services
Supporting good mental health can improve health outcomes, and the quality of maternal and child health services for all women can be improved by creating...
Download
Read More
3 January 2017
Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders
This booklet provides latest available estimates of the prevalence of depression and other common mental disorders at the global and regional level, together...
Download
Read More
1 January 2017
Evidence profile: urinary incontinence
- Integrated care for older people
Scoping question:Do non-pharmacological interventions
(prompted voiding, timed voiding, toilet
training, habit retraining, pelvic floor muscle
training)...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
19 June 2020
Through a structured and coordinated response, Colombia seeks to leave no one behind in the fight against COVID-19
7 April 2017
World Health Day 2017 "Depression: let’s talk” observed at the United Nations
7 January 2016
Insecurity drives health workers out of Yemen
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
More than one-third of women experience long-term health problems after childbirth
Infographic
Depression, A hidden burden flyer
Infographic
Depression is treatable flyer
5 October 2020
Providing psychological support: Wang Yi, China
Events
All →
Campaigns
10 September 2019
World Suicide Prevention Day 2019 - 40 seconds of action
World Health Day
7 April 2017
World Health Day 2017 - Depression: let's talk
Campaigns
World Mental Health day
Related health topics
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Health interventions
Suicide prevention