Suicide
Skip to main content
Overview
More than 720 000 people die by suicide every year. For each suicide, there are an estimated 20 suicide attempts.
Suicide can occur at any stage of life and in all regions of the world. In 2021, suicide was the third leading cause of death among 15–29-year-olds globally, and 73% of all suicides happened in low- and middle-income countries. Almost 20% of global suicides were due to pesticide self-poisoning.
While the link between suicide and mental health conditions (in particular, depression and alcohol use disorders) and a previous suicide attempt is well established in high-income countries, many suicides happen impulsively in moments of crisis. Further risk factors for suicide include experience of loss, loneliness, discrimination, relationship dispute, financial problems, chronic pain and illness, violence, abuse, and conflict or other humanitarian emergencies.
Stigma around mental health conditions and suicide means many people thinking about suicide do not seek help. Suicides and suicide attempts have a ripple effect that impacts on families, friends, colleagues, communities and societies.
Suicide: facts and figures globally
Suicide worldwide in 2021: global health estimates
LIVE LIFE: an implementation guide for suicide prevention in countries
Prevention
Much can be done at individual, community and national levels to prevent suicide and suicide attempts.
WHO’s LIVE LIFE
approach recommends four effective, evidence-based key interventions which should be included in every national response to suicide:
limit access to the means of suicide
interact with the media for responsible reporting of suicide
foster socio-emotional life skills in adolescents
early identify, assess, manage and follow up anyone who is affected by suicidal behaviours.
The foundational pillars of the interventions are situation analysis, multisectoral collaboration, awareness raising, capacity building, financing, surveillance, monitoring and evaluation.
Suicide prevention efforts require coordination and collaboration among multiple sectors, including health, education, labour, agriculture, business, justice, law, defence, politics and the media. Suicide prevention is often not adequately addressed because of stigma and lack of awareness that suicide is a major public health problem.
Communities also play a crucial role in preventing suicide.
The WHO community engagement toolkit
guides communities in identifying priorities and implementing activities according to local contexts.
WHO response
The urgency to act to prevent suicides has been recognized and prioritized at the highest levels.
The reduction of suicide rates in countries is an indicator in the UN Sustainable Development Goals (the only indicator for mental health), WHO’s General Programme of Work and WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2030.
The first WHO world suicide report,
Preventing suicide: a global imperative
, published in 2014, aimed to increase awareness of the public health significance of suicide and suicide attempts and make suicide prevention a public health priority.
Governments are encouraged to join WHO’s
LIVE LIFE initiative
, implement WHO’s
LIVE LIFE
package of effective and evidence-based key interventions for suicide prevention, and develop or strengthen comprehensive national suicide prevention strategies in a multisectoral public health approach. National leadership and coordination on suicide prevention are further supported by the publication of
National suicide prevention strategies: progress, examples and indicators
.
Recognizing that data and statistics are necessary for advocacy and decision-making, WHO published
Suicide worldwide in 2021: global health estimates
.
WHO’s vision is a world where death by suicide is no longer a leading cause of death and where people who are attempting or thinking about suicide feel comfortable seeking help which is provided capably and respectfully to all.
Fact sheets
Suicide
Mental disorders
Mental health
Questions and answers
Suicide
Databases and tools
LIVE LIFE implementation guide
Mental Health Atlas 2020
mhGAP Intervention guide self-harm/suicide module
Practice manual for establishing and maintaining surveillance systems for suicide attempts and self-harm
Preventing suicide: a community engagement toolkit
Suicide data
Training manual for surveillance of suicide and self-harm in communities via key informants
WHO STEPwise approach to NCD risk factor surveillance
Initiatives and groups
LIVE LIFE Initiative for Suicide Prevention
Resolutions and decisions
WHA74.14: Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
WHA76.17: The impact of chemicals, waste and pollution on human health
Technical work
Department of Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
News
All →
11 December 2025
Departmental update
New resource on setting up a suicide bereavement support group
11 December 2025
Departmental update
New resource to help countries count cases of suicide more accurately
7 November 2025
Statement
Joint call to strengthen policy and investment for child and youth mental health and well-being
2 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO releases new reports and estimates highlighting urgent gaps in mental health
Latest publications
All →
1 December 2025
Preventing suicide: a resource for strengthening suicide case registration
Timely, accurate and complete data on causes of death provide essential information for quantifying the size of the problem and for the development of...
Download
Read More
11 November 2025
Preventing suicide: how to start a suicide bereavement support group
This resource was written to support persons who seek to initiate a support group for suicide loss survivors. Suicide bereavement support groups offer...
Download
Read More
2 September 2025
World mental health today: latest data
Mental health needs are high, but responses are insufficient and inadequate. This report provides an update of mental health epidemiology, economic consequences...
Download
Read More
2 September 2025
Mental health atlas 2024
WHO’s Mental Health Atlas is a periodic survey and report of countries’ mental health policies and programmes, laws, information systems, financing,...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
20 August 2024
Preventing suicide by phasing out highly hazardous pesticides
Self-poisoning with pesticides is among the most common means of suicide worldwide, particularly in low- and middle-income countries where highly hazardous...
Download
Read More
20 March 2024
Addressing Suicide in Humanitarian Settings, IASC Guidance
This guidance note is a practical and concise resource addressing suicide and self-harm in humanitarian settings, including tools, reference materials,...
Read More
Our work
Monitoring and sharing suicide data and statistics
Advocating for national suicide prevention strategies
Strengthening surveillance of suicide and self-harm
Feature stories
All →
25 August 2025
From early detection to care: how Uruguay is transforming suicide prevention through real-time surveillance
10 September 2024
Suicide prevention in Thailand: A whole-of-society approach
9 September 2024
Suicide prevention in Suriname: strengthening multisectoral collaboration
9 September 2024
Suicide prevention in Japan: a public health priority
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Suicide: facts and figures globally
Infographic
Data quality of suicide estimates, 2021
Infographic
Do you know someone who may be considering suicide?
Infographic
Do you feel like life is not worth living?
Videos
All →
16 June 2021
Launch of WHO LIVE LIFE - Guide on suicide prevention
58 minutes
6 December 2020
Suicide prevention: interview with Klas Bergling, father of DJ Tim Bergling aka Avicii
18 November 2020
Preventing suicide and coping with loss
19 February 2020
Preventing suicide at work: information for employers, managers and employees
Events
All →
World Suicide Prevention Day 2025 - Changing the narrative on suicide
10 September 2025
World Suicide Prevention Day 2024 - Changing the narrative on suicide
10 September 2024
World Suicide Prevention Day 2023 - Creating Hope Through Action
10 September 2023
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Adolescent health
Conditions
Depression
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Human behaviour
Violence against women