Mental health of older adults
Skip to main content
Mental health of older adults
8 October 2025
Key facts
By 2030, one in six people in the world will be aged 60 years or over.
Loneliness and social isolation are key risk factors for mental health conditions in later life.
One in six older adults experiences abuse, often by their own carers.
Approximately 14% of adults aged 70 and over live with a mental disorder.
Mental disorders among older adults aged 70 years or older account for 6.8% of the total years lived with disability for this age group.
Overview
The world’s population is ageing fast. In 2023, 1.1 billion people in the world were aged 60 years or over. That figure is projected to nearly double to 2.1 billion by 2050, representing around one in five people globally. By the late 2060s, the number of persons aged 60 years and over will reach 2.5 billion and surpass the number of under-18-year-olds in the world. The number of people aged 80 years or older is expected to more than triple between 2023 and 2060 to reach 545 million (1).
Older adults contribute to society as family and community members, and many are volunteers and workers. While most have good health, many are at risk of developing mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety disorders. Many may also experience reduced mobility, chronic pain, frailty, dementia or other health problems, for which they require some form of long-term care. As people age, they are more likely to experience several conditions at the same time.
Prevalence
Around 14.1% of adults aged 70 and over live with a mental disorder (2). According to the
Global Health Estimates (GHE)
2021, these conditions account for 6.8% of the total years lived with disability among older adults aged 70 years or more. The most common mental health conditions for older adults are depression and anxiety. GHE 2021 shows that globally, around a sixth of deaths from suicide (16.6%) are among people aged 70 or over.
Mental health conditions among older people are often underrecognized and undertreated, and the stigma surrounding these conditions can make people reluctant to seek help.
Risk factors
At older ages, mental health is shaped not only by physical and social environments but also by the cumulative impacts of earlier life experiences and specific stressors related to ageing. Exposure to adversity, significant loss in intrinsic capacity and a decline in functional ability can all result in psychological distress.
Older adults are more likely to experience adverse events such as bereavement, or a drop in income or reduced sense of purpose with retirement. Despite their many contributions to society, many older adults are subject to
ageism, which can seriously affect people’s mental health.
Social isolation and loneliness, which affect about a quarter of older people, are key risk factors for mental health conditions in later life (3). So too is
abuse of older people, which includes any kind of physical, verbal, psychological, sexual or financial abuse, as well as neglect. One in six older adults experience abuse, often by their own carers
(4)
. Abuse of older adults has serious consequences and can lead to depression and anxiety.
Many older people are carers of spouses with chronic health conditions, such as dementia. The responsibilities of such care can be overwhelming and can affect the carer’s mental health.
Some older adults are at greater risk of depression and anxiety, because of dire living conditions, poor physical health or lack of access to quality support and services. This includes older adults living in humanitarian settings and those living with chronic illnesses (such as heart disease, cancer or stroke), neurological conditions (such as dementia), or substance use problems.
Promotion and prevention
Mental health promotion and prevention strategies for older adults focus on supporting healthy ageing. That means creating physical and social environments that support well-being and enable people to do what is important to them, despite losses in capacity.
Key mental health promotion and prevention strategies for healthy ageing include:
measures to reduce financial insecurity and income inequality;
programmes to ensure safe and accessible housing, public buildings and transport;
social support for older adults and their carers;
support for healthy behaviours, especially to eat a balanced diet, be physically active, refrain from tobacco and reduce alcohol use; and
health and social programmes targeted at vulnerable groups such as those who live alone or in remote areas and those living with a chronic health condition.
For older adults, social connection is particularly important to reduce risk factors such as social isolation and loneliness. At this stage of life, meaningful social activities can significantly improve positive mental health, life satisfaction and quality of life; they can also reduce depressive symptoms. Example interventions include befriending initiatives, community and support groups, social skills training, creative arts groups, leisure and education services and volunteering programmes (3).
Protection from ageism and abuse is also critical. Key interventions include anti-discrimination policies and laws, educational interventions and intergenerational activities. A range of carer interventions – including respite care, advice, education, financial support and psychological interventions – can support carers to maintain a good and healthy caring relationship that avoids abuse of older people.
Treatment and care
Prompt recognition and treatment of mental health conditions (and associated neurological and substance use conditions) in older adults is essential. This should follow standards for
integrated care for older people, which is community-based and focused on both the long-term care of older adults living with mental health conditions and declines in intrinsic capacity, as well as the education, training and support of carers. A mix of mental health interventions are usually recommended, alongside other supports to address the health, personal care and social needs of individuals.
Dementia is often an important concern. It affects people’s mental health (for example, sparking symptoms of psychosis and depression), and requires access to quality mental health care.
Responding to the abuse of older adults is also critical. Promising interventions include mandatory reporting of abuse, self-help groups, helplines and emergency shelters, psychological programmes for abusers, training of health care providers and other caregiver support interventions.
WHO response
WHO works with diverse partners on strategies, programmes and tools to support governments respond to the mental health needs of older adults.
For example, the
Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021–2030)
is a global collaboration led by WHO to improve the lives of older people, their families and the communities in which they live.
WHO Member States have also endorsed the
Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
, which supports improved mental health and mental health care for all populations, including older adults.
WHO’s
Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP)
provides evidence-based clinical protocols for assessing, managing and following up a set of priority mental, neurological and substance use conditions in non-specialized settings, including depression and dementia. The mhGAP intervention guide includes clinical tips for working with older adults.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, WHO and partners in the Inter-Agency-Standing Committee (IASC) developed the
Living with the times
toolkit of illustrated posters to help older adults maintain good mental health and well-being. Other WHO activities to support the mental health of older adults include the development of
scalable psychological interventions
to address depression and anxiety, research and guidance on interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness, and cost–effective solutions to prevent abuse of older adults.
References
(1) World Population Prospects 2024. New York: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division; 2024 (
https://population.un.org/wpp/downloads
)
(2) 2021 Global Burden of Disease (GBD) [online database]. Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2024 (
https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/
, accessed 13 August 2025).
(3) From loneliness to social connection: charting a path to healthier societies. Report of the WHO Commission on Social Connection. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2025.
https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/381746
.
(4) Yon YY, Mikton CR, Gassoumis ZD, Wilber KH. Elder abuse prevalence in community settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2017;5(2):e147–e156.
doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30006-2
.
Related
WHO's work on ageing
Global report on ageism
Integrated care for older people (ICOPE)
Scaling up care for mental, neurological and substance abuse disorders: mhGAP
WHO's work on mental health
Fact sheets
Abuse of older people
15 June 2024
Ageing and health
1 October 2025
Dementia
3 July 2026
Depressive disorder (depression)
29 August 2025
Mental health
8 October 2025
Suicide
25 March 2025