Scaling up mental health care
Skip to main content
Mental, neurological and substance use disorders are highly prevalent and burdensome globally. The gap between what is urgently needed and what is available to reduce the burden is still very wide.
WHO recognizes the need for action to reduce the burden, and to enhance the capacity of Member States to respond to this growing challenge. The WHO Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) aims at scaling up services for mental, neurological and substance use disorders in countries, especially those in the low- and middle-income categories.
Since it was introduced in 2008, mhGAP has been introduced in over 100 countries, so that many people have been treated for depression, schizophrenia, and epilepsy, prevented from suicide and supported to lead normal lives – even where resources are scarce
The priority conditions addressed by mhGAP are: depression, psychoses, suicidal ideation, epilepsy, dementia, disorders due to use of alcohol and psychoactive substances, mental and behavioural disorders in children and other conditions including medically unexplained somatic complaints and emotional, physical or behavioural problems after exposure to an extreme stressor.
Successful scaling up is the joint responsibility of governments, health professionals, civil society, communities, and families, with support from the international community. The essence of mhGAP is building partnerships for collective action.
WHO Teams
Related technical units
Mental Health and Substance Use
News
17 June 2021
Departmental update
Public consultation of experts to join the Guideline Development Group (GDG) for the mental health gap action programme (mhGAP) guideline update
Feature stories
7 October 2021
Lao PDR strengthens capacity to deliver mental health care nationwide
17 February 2014
mhGAP Training creates more support for vulnerable people in Syria
17 February 2014
Collaboration benefits mhGAP training in Mexico
17 February 2014
mhGAP: supporting Ebola survivors in Guinea
2 November 2020
mhGAP in Uganda - bringing treatment, dignity and real change
17 February 2014
Scale up of mhGAP across a disaster-affected region in the Philippines
9 October 2016
Building general practitioner capacity in Tunisia by implementing the mhGAP
9 October 2016
mhGAP programme expands to include scalable psychological interventions
mhGAP Evidence
mhGAP Evidence Resource Centre
mhGAP Tool
e-mhGAP for iOS
e-mhGAP for Android
Multimedia
27 November 2017
mhGAP: training videos
5 January 2010
mhGAP: mental health care in low resource settings - video showing that millions can be treated at low cost
29 June 2009
WHO: Introduction to mental health
Publications
9 September 2019
The mhGAP community toolkit: field test version
The mhGAP community toolkit: field test version is an integral part of
WHO's Mental
Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP), and aims at scaling up services
for...
Download
Read More
24 June 2019
mhGAP Intervention Guide - Version 2.0
This is the second version (2016) of the mhGAP Intervention Guide (mhGAP-IG) for mental, neurological and substance use (MNS) disorders in non-specialist...
Download
Read More
8 January 2018
mhGAP Operations Manual
The WHO Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) aims at scaling up mental health services in non-specialized health settings to achieve universal health...
Download
Read More
20 March 2017
mhGAP Training Manuals - for the mhGAP Intervention Guide for mental, neurological and substance use...
As part of the Mental Health Gap Action Programme, WHO has developed training manuals (Training of trainers and supervisors training manual and Training...
Download
Read More
28 February 2015
mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide (mhGAP-HIG)
Adults and children affected by emergencies experience a substantial and diverse range of mental, substance use, and neurological problems. The mhGAP...
Download
Read More
1 January 2015
WHO mhGAP Guideline Update
In 2015 WHO updated the mhGAP guidelines, first issued in 2009, for the management of mental, neurological and substance use (MNS) disorders.The mhGAP...
Download
Read More
28 February 2013
mhGAP module Assessment Management of Conditions Specifically Related to Stress
This new mhGAP module on Conditions Specifically Related to Stress by WHO and UNHCR contains assessment and management advice related to acute stress,...
Download
Read More
22 February 2010
mhGAP Intervention Guide - Version 1.0
The mhGAP Intervention Guide (mhGAP-IG) for mental, neurological and substance use disorders for non-specialist health settings, is a technical tool developed...
Download
Read More
Fact sheets
8 October 2025
Mental health of older adults
30 September 2025
Mental disorders
17 September 2025
Autism
1 September 2025
Mental health of adolescents
6 May 2025
Mental health in emergencies
Related health topics
Health and wellbeing
Brain health
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Contact
For additional information on the mhGAP Programme please write to:
mhgap-info@who.int