Ensuring a coordinated and effective mental health response in emergencies
Skip to main content
Emergency situations such as armed conflicts, natural disasters and other humanitarian crises exacerbate the risk of mental health conditions. Nearly all people affected by these emergencies will experience psychological distress, with one in five likely to have a mental disorder such as depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, bipolar disorder or schizophrenia. These risks are heightened in older people and marginalized groups. Stressful events such as violence and loss, as well as poverty, discrimination, overcrowding, and food and resource insecurity, are common in emergencies and can increase the risk of developing mental health conditions. People with severe mental disorders are particularly vulnerable.
However, while emergencies have a detrimental effect on mental health, they have also been shown to provide opportunities to build sustainable mental health care systems in the period following the event.
WHO works around the world to ensure that the humanitarian mental health response is both coordinated and effective. We work with our many partner organizations to provide guidelines, intervention manuals, policy directions and other tools to support the emergency response for mental health. WHO also co-chairs the IASC Reference Group on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings, which provides advice and support to organizations working in emergency settings.
WHO Teams
Related technical units
Mental Health and Substance Use
News
18 September 2023
Scaling up mental health and psychosocial support preparedness: lessons from Estonia
23 June 2022
WHO digital mental health intervention effective in reducing depression among Syrian refugees in Lebanon
2 March 2022
News release
COVID-19 pandemic triggers 25% increase in prevalence of anxiety and depression worldwide
11 January 2022
News release
WHO psychological intervention effective in preventing mental disorders among Syrian refugees in Turkey
Publications
6 October 2023
mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide (mhGAP-HIG) training of health-care providers
The mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide (mhGAP-HIG) Training of Health-Care Providers manual is designed to guide facilitators in training non-specialist...
Download
Read More
2 March 2022
Mental Health and COVID-19: Early evidence of the pandemic’s impact: Scientific brief, 2 March 2022
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a severe impact on the mental health and wellbeing of people around the world while also raising concerns of increased suicidal...
Download
Read More
28 February 2013
BUILDING BACK BETTER: Sustainable mental health care after emergencies
Emergencies, in spite of their tragic nature and adverse effects on mental health, are unparalleled opportunities to build better mental health systems...
Download
Read More
1 January 2018
Problem management plus (‎‎‎‎‎‎PM+)‎‎‎‎‎‎: individual psychological help for adults impaired by distress...
With this manual, the World Health Organization (WHO) is responding to requests from colleagues around the world who seek guidance on psychological interventions...
Download
Read More
4 March 2013
Psychological first aid
This manual is designed to orient helpers to offer psychological first aid (PFA) to people following
a serious crisis event. PFA involves humane, supportive...
Download
Read More
2 October 2011
Psychological first aid: Guide for field workers
This guide covers psychological first aid which involves humane, supportive and practical help to fellow human beings suffering serious crisis events....
Download
Read More
29 April 2020
Doing What Matters in Times of Stress
Doing What Matters in Times of Stress: An Illustrated Guide is a stress management guide for coping with adversity. The guide aims to equip people...
Download
Read More
28 February 2015
mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide (mhGAP-HIG)
Adults and children affected by emergencies experience a substantial and diverse range of mental, substance use, and neurological problems. The mhGAP...
Download
Read More
IASC publication
Technical Note, Linking Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS): Practical Tools, Approaches and Case Studies
Highlight
Mental health & COVID-19
Data
WHO MiNDbank
Feature stories
9 June 2023
Delivering effective and accountable mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) during emergencies and beyond
17 December 2021
Providing mental health support in humanitarian emergencies: an opportunity to integrate care in a sustainable way
10 April 2018
Scaling up capacity for Problem Management Plus (PM+)
9 April 2018
Healing the mental scars of violence in northeastern Nigeria
10 November 2016
WHO behavioural intervention shows promise for treating depression and anxiety in conflict-affected areas
10 November 2016
Supporting people with severe mental disorders in war and other disaster settings: A need to protect the most vulnerable
9 October 2016
mhGAP programme expands to include scalable psychological interventions
29 March 2016
Mental health services in Liberia: building back better
Related health topic
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Commentaries
11 June 2019
Mental health conditions in conflict situations are much more widespread than we thought
Fact sheet
6 May 2025
Mental health in emergencies