Monitoring and sharing suicide data and statistics
Skip to main content
The timely registration and regular monitoring of suicide data form the backbone of any suicide prevention efforts and national suicide prevention strategies. Doing so provides essential information for understanding the scope of the problem so that interventions can be tailored to meet the needs of populations.
WHO's annual
World Health Statistics
report monitors health for the UN Sustainable Development Goals, which include
suicide estimates
(3.4.2 as the only indicator of mental health) from the WHO Global Health Estimates. The WHO
Global Health Estimates
provide comprehensive and comparable estimates of mortality (including suicide) and morbidity for the world, WHO regions, and countries. The estimates pertaining to suicide are accessible on the WHO
Global Health Observatory
.
The WHO
Mortality Database
is a compilation of mortality data as reported annually by Member States from their civil registration and vital statistics systems. These mortality data are used as an input for the WHO Global Health Estimates. Based on the WHO Global Health Estimates, WHO published
Suicide worldwide in 2021: Global Health Estimates
to provide essential information on suicide across countries and WHO regions.
Prior to this, WHO published its first world suicide report
Preventing suicide: a global imperative
to increase the awareness of the scale and public health significance of suicide and suicide attempts worldwide.
Quality of suicide mortality data
varies globally. Of the 183 WHO Member States for which estimates were made for the year 2021, 86 have good-quality (labelled as high and medium quality) vital registration data that can be used directly to estimate suicide rates.
Publications
23 May 2025
Suicide worldwide in 2021: global health estimates
An estimated 727 000 persons died by suicide in 2021. Suicide was the third leading cause of death among 15-29-year-olds; second for females, third for...
Download
Read More
15 May 2025
World health statistics 2025: monitoring health for the SDGs, sustainable development goals
The World health statistics report is the annual compilation of health and health-related indicators, which has been published by the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
19 May 2023
World health statistics 2023: monitoring health for the SDGs, sustainable development goals
The World health statistics report is the annual compilation of health and health-related indicators which has been published by the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
16 June 2021
Suicide worldwide in 2019
More than 700 000 persons die by suicide every year globally. Suicide is the fourth leading cause of death among 15-29 year olds. The reduction of suicide...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
Infographic
Data quality of suicide estimates, 2021
Related Health topics
Conditions
Depression
Health and wellbeing
Mental health