Advocating for national suicide prevention strategies
Skip to main content
WHO advocates for countries to take action to prevent suicide, ideally through a comprehensive national suicide prevention strategy. A government-led comprehensive national strategy is a powerful tool which helps to ensure that the government and other stakeholders are committed to preventing suicide in a country, that there is coordination and monitoring of their efforts, that suicide prevention is placed high on the political agenda, and that resources are allocated to make it possible to implement the necessary actions. WHO has published a resource on
National suicide prevention strategies
with examples and indicators to inspire governments and policy-makers to establish their own strategy, and
LIVE LIFE
to implement effective evidence-based interventions. Further guidance on the processes involved in developing national suicide prevention strategies can be found in WHO’s
Public health action for the prevention of suicide
, which highlights the collective responsibility of suicide prevention and identifies the critical elements for a strategy and framework. I
n Suriname, for example, a
situation analysis
was conducted to help identify priorities for suicide prevention. These findings are being translated into a national suicide prevention strategy.
National suicide prevention strategy documents from countries can be accessed on the
WHO
MiNDbank
.
Where suicide and suicide attempts remain illegal,
decriminalization
represents one critical step governments can take in their efforts to prevent suicide.
The absence of a comprehensive national suicide prevention strategy should not stop countries from implementing interventions for suicide prevention. In many countries that have no strategy, a wide range of stakeholders are engaged in suicide prevention activities – from organizing survivors’ support groups to awareness-raising and advocacy for at-risk populations. WHO recognizes the role that both governments and communities play in implementing actions for suicide prevention.
Communities can incorporate and enhance efforts undertaken at the national level by considering their local community needs, priorities and circumstances. Variations in the suicide rates within countries (e.g. by geographical region) suggest that top-down suicide prevention should go hand-in-hand with local bottom-up processes. The WHO
toolkit for engaging communities in suicide prevention
aims to assist with identifying suicide prevention priorities and directing appropriate community activities towards the whole community, specific groups and/or individuals. A corresponding e-learning course for the toolkit, which is available in
English
and
French
, provides guidance for establishing supportive networks to assist communities in suicide prevention activities or in enhancing activities that may already be in place. Each section provides advice on how to move forward with community engagement and suggests tools that can be used to further the process of building a suicide prevention action plan that is relevant to the community.
Whereas advocacy aims to bring about changes, such as a national suicide prevention strategy or decriminalization of suicide, awareness-raising draws people’s attention to facts such as suicide is a serious public health issue. Both can range from events in a single community to a nationwide organized process of communication that targets a public audience and can be continuous, regular or annual (such as
World Suicide Prevention Day
or
World Mental Health Day
), with “champions” leading public campaigns. It is important to have a clear focus and a call to action and to decide the message to be communicated, adapt it to the target audience, select the means of communication and test the acceptability and potential impact of the message beforehand. Awareness raising can create an environment for suicide prevention and is a foundation for suicide prevention in
LIVE LIFE
but should be accompanied by the implementation of evidence-based interventions.
The WHO Regional Office for Africa has developed the
Speak Up 4 Life
campaign to promote awareness and increase action on suicide prevention. The WHO Regional Office Region for the Americas has a
suicide prevention campaign
for World Suicide Prevention Day. The WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia published a
regional strategy on preventing suicide.
In the context of humanitarian crises and emergencies, countries may need to focus on immediate and feasible priorities for suicide prevention. The Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) has produced
Guidance Addressing Suicide in Humanitarian Settings
. In addition, the
mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide
can help support the mental health of adults and children affected by emergencies.
News
12 September 2023
Departmental update
WHO launches new resources on prevention and decriminalization of suicide
Feature story
Strengthening suicide prevention in the Western Pacific Region: Weaving stories of leadership, hope and action
10 February 2022
Suicide prevention in Bhutan: scaling-up during the pandemic
Publications
12 September 2023
WHO Policy Brief on the health aspects of decriminalization of suicide and suicide attempts
Reducing the global suicide mortality rate by a third by 2030 is a target of both the UN Sustainable Development Goals and the WHO Global Mental Health...
Download
Read More
16 June 2022
World mental health report: Transforming mental health for all
Mental health is critically important to everyone, everywhere. All over the world, mental health needs are high but responses are insufficient and inadequate....
Download
Read More
21 September 2021
Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030
The Sixty-sixth World Health Assembly, consisting of Ministers of Health of 194 Member States, adopted the WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action...
Download
Read More
17 June 2021
LIVE LIFE: An implementation guide for suicide prevention in countries
More than 700 000 people lose their life to suicide every year. The world is not on track to reach the 2030 suicide reduction targets. WHO advocates for...
Download
Read More
9 September 2019
The mhGAP community toolkit: field test version
The mhGAP community toolkit: field test version is an integral part of
WHO's Mental
Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP), and aims at scaling up services
for...
Download
Read More
24 June 2019
Preventing suicide: a community engagement toolkit
Communities have an important role to play in suicide prevention. They can provide support to people who are vulnerable and to those who have made an attempt...
Download
Read More
30 November 2018
National suicide prevention strategies: progress, examples and indicators
National suicide prevention strategies are essential for elevating suicide prevention on the political agenda. A national strategy and associated action...
Download
Read More
1 January 2012
Public health action for the prevention of suicide
The purpose of this document is to provide a resource to assist governments in developing and implementing strategies for the prevention of suicide as...
Download
Read More
Infographics
Infographic
Data quality of suicide estimates, 2021
Infographic
Quick reference guide: responsible reporting on suicide
Infographic
PREVENTING SUICIDE: information for people working in jails and prisons
Infographic
PREVENTING SUICIDE: information for journalists and others writing about suicide
Infographic
PREVENTING SUICIDE: information for health workers
Infographic
PREVENTING SUICIDE AT WORK: information for employers, managers and employees
Infographic
PREVENTING SUICIDE: information for police, firefighters and other emergency responders
Infographic
Do you know someone who may be considering suicide?
Campaigns
World Suicide Prevention Day 2023
Related Health topics
Conditions
Depression
Health and wellbeing
Mental health