
Where to get urgent help for mental health - NHS
Skip to main content
Where to get urgent help for mental health
If you need help for a mental health crisis or emergency, you should get immediate expert advice and assessment.
It's important to know that support services are available for you to access, whatever you’re going through.
Urgent advice:
Get advice from 111 or ask for an urgent GP appointment if:
you need urgent help for your mental health
Get help from 111 online
or call
111
and select the mental health option.
111 will tell you the right place to get help. You may be able to speak to a trained mental health professional over the phone.
A GP can advise you about helpful treatments and also help you
access mental health services
. You may be able to refer yourself to some services.
Other ways to get help with your mental health
Free listening services
These services offer confidential support from trained volunteers. You can talk about anything that's troubling you, no matter how difficult:
call
116 123
to talk to
Samaritans
if you're under 19, you can also call
0800 1111
to talk to
Childline
– the number will not appear on your phone bill
These services will only share your information if they are very worried about you or think you are in immediate danger.
Information:
Coping during a crisis
The mental health charity Mind has information on
ways to help yourself cope during a crisis
.
This includes calming exercises and a tool to get you through the next few hours.
Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E now if:
someone's life is at risk – for example, they have seriously injured themselves or taken an overdose
you do not feel you can keep yourself or someone else safe
A mental health emergency should be taken as seriously as a physical one. You will not be wasting anyone's time.
Call:
999
How a mental health emergency is treated in A&E
If you go to A&E, the staff should treat you with respect and look after any immediate physical and mental health needs.
They should also refer you to a liaison psychiatry service or local crisis resolution and home treatment team (CRHT).
Find out about:
liaison psychiatry services on the Royal College of Psychiatrists website
crisis resolution and home treatment teams (CRHTs) on the Mind website
The team in charge of your care will assess you and decide on the best course of care.
This usually involves supporting you with your mental health at home. They may also refer you to other services to support your needs.
Information:
Making a safety plan
If you struggle with suicidal thoughts or are supporting someone else, it may help to make a safety plan to use if you need it:
the
Staying Safe website provides information on how to make a safety plan
, including video tutorials and online templates to guide you through the process
the mental health charity
Mind also provides information on planning for a mental health crisis
Page last reviewed: 26 April 2023
Next review due: 26 April 2026