
Find NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression - NHS
Skip to main content
Find NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression
Use this service to find NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression you can refer yourself to.
Information:
You do not need to have a diagnosed mental health condition to refer yourself to NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression.
You can use this service to refer yourself if:
you live in England
you're aged 18 or over (and aged 16 or 17 in some areas)
If you're aged 17 or under, you can also find out about support through
children and young people's mental health services.
About NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression
NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression are psychological treatments that may help if you:
have persistent low mood
often feel very anxious about lots of different things
worry constantly about your health
fear social situations
have panic attacks
have an overwhelming fear of something (phobias), including agoraphobia
have obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
have body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
They may also help if you have anxiety or depression and a long term health condition, such as chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
To access NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression you can:
refer yourself
ask your GP to refer you
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you want help with your mental health but are not sure if NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression is right for you
How to refer yourself for NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression
To refer yourself using this service, you'll need to enter the name of your GP surgery. This is to help find NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression in your GP surgery's area.
When you refer yourself, the talking therapies service will contact you. If they can help you, they'll tell you how long you may need to wait for your first therapy session.
They'll also explain what information will be shared with your GP.
If you're not registered with a GP
You may be able to refer yourself to NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression without being registered with a GP.
Find out if you can do this in your area on your local NHS talking therapies website. Search online for "NHS talking therapies" and include the county or town you live in.
You can also find out
how to register with a GP surgery.
Find NHS talking therapies
Important:
Get urgent help
Support is available if you or someone you know are having a mental health crisis or emergency, no matter what you're going through.
Find out where to get urgent help for mental health
Page last reviewed: 14 February 2025
Next review due: 14 February 2028