Finding Help for Co-Occurring Substance Use and Mental Disorders - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Finding Help for Co-Occurring Substance Use and Mental Disorders
Substance use disorders affect the brain and behavior, causing difficulties in work, school, or in relationships. These disorders involve patterns of behaviors that might include using more of the substance than planned, finding it difficult to stop, or continuing to use despite knowing it's causing harm.
Sometimes, people with substance use disorders may take risks while using, like driving under the influence. They can develop tolerance (needing more of the substance to feel the same effects) or withdrawal symptoms when they stop. Substance use disorders exist on a spectrum, ranging from mild to severe, but it's important to remember that substance use disorders are treatable.
The relationship between substance use and mental disorders is complex and often interconnected. Many people with substance use disorders also experience other mental disorders like
depression
,
anxiety
, or
bipolar disorder
. Similarly, people with mental disorders are at a higher risk of developing substance use problems.
For more information, please see the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) webpage on
Co-Occurring Disorders and Health Conditions
.
Why do substance use and other mental disorders occur together?
Research suggests possibilities that could explain why substance use disorders and other mental disorders may occur together:
Certain environmental factors (like stress or trauma, and genetics) can contribute to developing both substance use disorders and other mental disorders.
Mental disorders can lead to an increase in risky behaviors, including using substances to cope. Additionally, some mental disorders alter the brain in ways that can make substances feel more rewarding, further increasing the risk of substance use disorders.
The reverse is also true: Substance use can contribute to brain changes that increase the risk of other mental disorders.
How are these co-occurring disorders diagnosed and treated?
Accurate diagnosis is key for treating co-occurring substance use and mental disorders, since symptoms may overlap. Health care providers with experience in both substance use disorders and mental disorders can use comprehensive assessment tools to reduce the chance of a missed diagnosis and create an effective treatment plan.
Talk to your health care provider to determine the best treatment for you. It is important to give any treatment plan a chance to work before deciding whether it is right for you.
Integrated care
combines mental health and substance use treatment so patients can receive more convenient, coordinated care in one place. Treatment can involve behavioral therapies, medications, care management services, or a combination. Care teams work with patients to help find evidence-supported treatments that work for the patient.
Behavioral therapies
such as cognitive behavioral therapy, contingency management, and motivational interviewing can help individuals build coping skills and learn to manage co-occurring substance use and mental disorders.
Family-based interventions
like Multisystemic Therapy and Functional Family Therapy, which focus on improving family dynamics and communication and addressing environmental factors that contribute to substance use and mental health issues, can be particularly effective.
Medications
can effectively
treat addictions to opioids and alcohol and lessen the symptoms of many other mental disorders. Some medications may be useful in treating multiple disorders.
Federal resources on treatment
Information about Medications for Opioid Use Disorder (U.S. Food & Drug Administration)
Screening and Treatment of Co-Occurring Disorders (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration)
Treatment (National Institute on Drug Abuse)
Treatment for Alcohol Problems (National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism)
How can I find help for co-occurring substance use and mental disorders?
If you have concerns about your mental health, talk to a primary care provider. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out the next steps. Find
tips for talking with a health care provider
about your mental health.
You can
learn more about getting help
on the NIMH website. You can also learn about
finding support
,
locating mental health services
, and treatment for substance use disorders in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) website. For tools and tips to quit smoking, visit the
National Cancer Institute’s Smokefree.gov
website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at
988
or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH is supporting research to expand therapeutic options for treating addiction, including overdose treatment and medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorder. As part of the
Helping to End Addiction Long-term® Initiative (NIH HEAL Initiative®)
, NIMH leads a research program that seeks to optimize the delivery of services for people with opioid use disorders, mental disorders, and suicide risk.
Explore clinical trials for co-occurring substance use and mental disorders
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials—Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on Mental Disorders and Substance Misuse
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
NIMH Mental Health Research Studies for Adults
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
NIMH Mental Health Research Studies for Children
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
Additional federal resources
MedlinePlus
: Information, journal articles, and other resources collected by the National Library of Medicine. Many resources are also available in Spanish.
Alcohol Use Disorder
Drug Use and Addiction
Mental Health and Behavior
Opioids and Opioid Use Disorder
Risks of Tobacco
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
DrugFacts
: Plain and simple facts about drugs and addiction.
Parents and Educators
: Science-based information about drug use, health, and the developing brain for young people and their parents, guardians, teachers, and other educators
Substance Use and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)
Mental Illness and Substance Use in Young Adults
: Information and resources to support teens and young adults
Resources for Families Coping with Mental and Substance Use Disorders
: Audio and video files, and other resources for families
What to Expect (FindTreatment.gov)
: Information on treatment options, paying for treatment, and understanding addiction and mental health
Last reviewed:
March 2025
Unless otherwise specified, the information on our website and in our publications is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please
cite the National Institute of Mental Health
as the source.
Read our copyright policy
to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content.
Join A Study
Studies for Adults
Studies for Children
Science Updates About Substance Use
New NIH Study Reveals Shared Genetic Markers Underlying Substance Use Disorders
Long-acting antiretroviral therapy suppresses HIV among people with unstable housing, mental illnesses, substance use disorder
Emergency Drug Overdose Visits Linked to Risk for Suicide
More