Suicide Prevention - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Suicide Prevention
La información sobre prevención del suicidio también está disponible en español
.
On this page
What is suicide?
Where can I learn more about suicide prevention?
Why is NIMH studying suicide prevention?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about suicide prevention
Share outreach materials about suicide prevention
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is suicide?
Suicide is when people harm themselves with the intent of ending their life, and they die as a result. A suicide attempt is when people harm themselves with the intent of ending their life, but they do not die.
People of all backgrounds can be at risk of suicide. Suicidal behavior is complex, and there is no single cause.
Where can I learn more about suicide prevention?
Free health information
Digital brochures and fact sheets with more information about suicide prevention, including signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Available for free in print and online.
Science updates
NIMH news about suicide prevention, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Statistics
Information about the prevalence and treatment of suicide prevention in the United States.
Why is NIMH studying suicide prevention?
Suicide is a leading cause of death in the United States and a major public health concern. When a person dies by suicide, the effects are felt by family, friends, and communities.
Data show that some communities experience higher rates of suicide than others. Effective, evidence-based programs and treatment options can help prevent suicide.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH is supporting and conducting research to understand who is at risk of suicide and why. This includes research that examines ways to identify individuals at increased risk and identifies groups and communities that are disproportionately affected by suicide.
We’re also supporting research that evaluates the effectiveness of different suicide prevention programs. This includes programs in health care, community, school, and justice system settings. It also includes efforts to provide effective programs and practices focused on suicide prevention.
Additionally, we’re funding
practice-based suicide prevention research centers
that aim to speed the translation of effective interventions and services into practice. And we’re supporting research to develop and test fast-acting treatments that can reduce suicidal thoughts and behaviors.
Explore clinical trials about suicide prevention
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on Suicide Prevention
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
NIMH Suicide Prevention Studies for Adults
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
Share outreach materials about suicide prevention
Digital shareables
Social media graphics, videos, and resources about suicide prevention.
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
2024 National Strategy for Suicide Prevention
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services): A comprehensive whole-of-society approach to suicide prevention accompanied by a Federal Action Plan
Ask Suicide-Screening Questions Toolkit
(NIMH): A free screening resource for medical settings that can help health care providers identify youth and adults at risk for suicide
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention
: A public-private partnership working to advance the National Strategy for Suicide Prevention
Suicide
(MedlinePlus): Information, journal articles, and other resources about suicide and suicide prevention collected by the National Library of Medicine
Suicide Prevention
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention): Resources for communities and states to support suicide prevention efforts
Suicide Prevention and Care Program
(Indian Health Service): A national program addressing suicide prevention, based on fostering collaborations across Tribes, Tribal organizations, Urban Indian organizations, and the Indian Health Service
Suicide Prevention Resource Center
: A federally supported resource center devoted to advancing the implementation of the National Strategy for Suicide Prevention
Last Reviewed:
August 2025