Older Adults and Mental Health - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Older Adults and Mental Health
Why is it important to take care of our mental health as we age?
As people age, they may experience certain life changes that impact their mental health, such as coping with a serious illness or losing a loved one. Although many people will adjust to these life changes, some may experience feelings of grief, social isolation, or loneliness. When these feelings persist, they can lead to mental illnesses, such as depression and anxiety.
Mental health is important at every stage of life. Effective treatment options are available to help older adults manage their mental health and improve their quality of life. Recognizing the signs and seeing a health care provider are the first steps to getting treatment.
Mental health includes emotional, psychological, and social well-being. Learn more about
taking care of your mental health
.
What are symptoms of mental disorders in older adults?
Noticeable changes in mood, energy level, or appetite
Feeling flat or having trouble feeling positive emotions
Difficulty sleeping or sleeping too much
Difficulty concentrating, feeling restless, or on edge
Increased worry or feeling stressed
Anger, irritability, or aggressiveness
Ongoing headaches, digestive issues, or pain
Misuse of alcohol or drugs
Sadness or hopelessness
Thoughts of death or suicide or suicide attempts
Engaging in high-risk activities
Obsessive thinking or compulsive behavior
Thoughts or behaviors that interfere with work, family, or social life
Engaging in thinking or behavior that is concerning to others
Seeing, hearing, and feeling things that other people do not see, hear, or feel
Mental disorders can be treated
: A primary care provider is a good place to start if you're looking for help. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out next steps. Find
tips for talking with a health care provider
about your mental health.
You can
learn more about getting help
on the NIMH website. You can also learn about
finding support
and locating mental health services in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline
at
988
or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call
911
.
Health hotlines
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
:
The Lifeline provides free and confidential emotional support to people in suicidal crisis or emotional distress 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, across the United States. Call or text
988
to connect with a trained crisis counselor. Support is also available via
live chat
. Para ayuda
en español, llame al 988
.
Veterans Crisis Line
: This helpline is a free, confidential resource for veterans of all ages and circumstances. Call
988
then press 1; text
838255
; or
chat online
to connect with 24/7 support.
Disaster Distress Hotline
: This helpline from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides immediate crisis counseling for people experiencing emotional distress related to any natural or human-caused disaster. The helpline is free, multilingual, confidential, and available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Call or text
1-800-985-5990
.
NIH Health Info Lines
Health topics and resources for older adults
Featured health topics
Anxiety Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
Coping with Traumatic Events
Depression
Eating Disorders
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Psychosis
Suicide Prevention
Featured brochures and fact sheets
Federal resources
Depression and Aging
: This Centers for Disease Control and Prevention webpage describes signs of depression and how depression can be different for older adults.
Healthy Aging
: This U.S. Department of Health and Human Services webpage lists links to health resources and services for older adults.
National Institute on Aging (NIA): Health Topics
: NIA offers health information on various topics, including
depression
.
Older Adult Mental Health
: The National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus offers resources on aging and mental health (
en español
).
Resources for Older Adults
: The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration offers publications and digital products for and about older adults.
Research resources
NIMH Geriatrics and Aging Processes Research Branch
: This NIMH branch supports programs of research, research mid-career development, and resource development in the etiology, pathophysiology, and course of mental disorders of late life; the relationships between aging and mental disorders; the treatment and recovery of persons with aging-related disorders; and the prevention of these disorders and their consequences.
Why should older adults participate in clinical trials?
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although people may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, they should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others can be better helped in the future.
Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct many studies with patients and healthy volunteers. We have new and better treatment options today because of what clinical trials have uncovered. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.
To learn more or find a study, visit:
NIMH’s Clinical Trials webpage:
Information about participating in clinical trials
In addition, NIMH researchers are also studying mental disorders that affect older adults. To find studies being conducted at NIMH, visit
Join a Study: Adults
.
Our studies take place at the
NIH Clinical Center
in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. If you don’t live nearby, you can find a
clinical trial near you
.
It is important for clinical trials to have participants of different ages, sexes, races, and ethnicities. When research involves a group of people who are similar, the findings may not apply to or benefit everyone. When clinical trials include diverse participants, the study results may have a much wider applicability.
Researchers need the participation of older adults in their clinical trials so that they can learn more about how new drugs, therapies, medical devices, surgical procedures, or tests will work for all people. For more information, check out National Institute on Aging's
What Are Clinical Trials and Studies?
webpage.
Last Reviewed:
April 2024
Unless otherwise specified, the information on our website and in our publications is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please
cite the National Institute of Mental Health
as the source.
Read our copyright policy
to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content.