Anxiety Disorders - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Anxiety Disorders
On this page
What is anxiety?
Where can I learn more about anxiety disorders?
Why is NIMH studying anxiety disorders?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about anxiety disorders
Share outreach materials about anxiety disorders
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is anxiety?
Feeling anxious is a normal part of life. Many people worry about things such as health, money, school, work, or family. But anxiety disorders involve more than occasional worry or fear. For people with these disorders, anxiety does not go away, is felt in many situations, and can get worse over time.
There are several types of anxiety disorders, including:
Generalized anxiety disorder
Panic disorder
Social anxiety disorder
Various phobia-related disorders
Where can I learn more about anxiety disorders?
Free health information
Digital brochures and fact sheets with more information about anxiety disorders, including signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Available for free in print and online.
Science updates
NIMH news about anxiety disorders, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Statistics
Information about the prevalence and treatment of anxiety disorders in the United States.
Why is NIMH studying anxiety disorders?
About
a third of U.S. adolescents and adults experience an anxiety disorder
at some point in their lives. Anxiety disorder symptoms can interfere with daily life and routine activities, such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships. In severe cases, a person might feel intense fear in common situations, avoid social encounters, or refuse to leave their home.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH conducts and funds research to examine environmental and genetic factors that contribute to anxiety disorders. These include studies comparing brain development and biology among people with and without anxiety disorders. Our supported research also focuses on family and other environmental factors that may influence the risk for anxiety disorders in infants, children, adolescents, and adults.
NIMH-supported research is examining rates and symptoms of anxiety disorders after major life events like pregnancy or after trauma or illness. Of particular interest are predictors and symptoms of anxiety disorders among youth, including during the college transition and in relation to social media use.
Additionally, NIMH supports research on interventions and treatments for different types of anxiety disorders. We’re supporting studies that explore the overlap of anxiety with other disorders, such as depression and eating disorders, as well as how anxiety symptoms, severity, and treatment needs change with age.
Explore clinical trials about anxiety disorders
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on Anxiety Disorders
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
NIMH Anxiety Disorders Studies for Adults
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
NIMH Anxiety Disorders Studies for Children
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
Share outreach materials about anxiety disorders
Digital shareables
Social media graphics, videos, and resources about anxiety disorders.
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
Anxiety
(MedlinePlus): Information, journal articles, and other resources about anxiety disorders collected by the National Library of Medicine
Last Reviewed:
December 2024