Caring for Your Mental Health - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Caring for Your Mental Health
Esta página también está disponible en español
.
Overview
Mental health includes emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It is more than the absence of a mental illness—it’s essential to your overall health and quality of life. Self-care can play a role in maintaining your mental health and help support your treatment and recovery if you have a mental illness.
How can I take care of my mental health?
Self-care means taking the time to do things that help you live well and improve both your physical health and mental health. This can help you manage stress, lower your risk of illness, and increase your energy. Even small acts of self-care in your daily life can have a big impact.
Here are some self-care tips:
Get regular exercise.
Just 30 minutes of walking every day can boost your mood and improve your health. Small amounts of exercise add up, so don’t be discouraged if you can’t do 30 minutes at one time.
Eat healthy, regular meals and stay hydrated.
A balanced diet and plenty of water can improve your energy and focus throughout the day. Pay attention to your intake of caffeine and alcohol and how they affect your mood and well-being—for some, decreasing caffeine and alcohol consumption can be helpful.
Make sleep a priority
. Stick to a schedule, and make sure you’re getting enough sleep. Blue light from devices and screens can make it harder to fall asleep, so reduce blue light exposure from your phone or computer before bedtime.
Try a relaxing activity.
Explore relaxation or wellness programs or apps, which may incorporate meditation, muscle relaxation, or breathing exercises. Schedule regular times for these and other healthy activities you enjoy, such as listening to music, reading, spending time in nature, and engaging in low-stress hobbies.
Set goals and priorities.
Decide what must get done now and what can wait. Learn to say “no” to new tasks if you start to feel like you’re taking on too much. Try to appreciate what you have accomplished at the end of the day.
Practice gratitude.
Remind yourself daily of things you are grateful for. Be specific. Write them down or replay them in your mind.
Focus on positivity
. Identify and challenge your negative and unhelpful thoughts.
Stay connected.
Reach out to friends or family members who can provide emotional support and practical help.
Self-care looks different for everyone, and it is important to find what you need and enjoy. It may take trial and error to discover what works best for you.
Learn more about
healthy practices for your mind and body
.
When should I seek professional help?
Seek professional help if you are experiencing severe or distressing symptoms that have lasted 2 weeks or more, such as:
Difficulty sleeping
Changes in appetite or unplanned weight changes
Difficulty getting out of bed in the morning because of mood
Difficulty concentrating
Loss of interest in things you usually find enjoyable
Inability to complete usual tasks and activities
Feelings of irritability, frustration, or restlessness
How can I find help?
If you have concerns about your mental health, talk to a primary care provider. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out the next steps. Find
tips for talking with a health care provider
about your mental health.
You can
learn more about getting help
on the NIMH website. You can also learn about
finding support
and
locating mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at
988
or chat at
988lifeline.org
. This service is confidential, free, and available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. In life-threatening situations, call
911.
Suicide is preventable—learn about
warning signs of suicide
and
action steps
for helping someone in emotional distress.
Featured videos
&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;#160;
GREAT: Helpful Practices to Manage Stress and Anxiety:
Learn about helpful practices to manage stress and anxiety. GREAT was developed by Dr. Krystal Lewis, a licensed clinical psychologist at NIMH.
&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;#160;
Mental Health Minute: Stress and Anxiety in Adolescents:
Got 60 seconds? Take a mental health minute to learn about stress and anxiety in adolescents.
Featured fact sheets
More
Learn more
NIH Wellness Toolkits
: NIH provides toolkits with strategies for improving your
emotional health
and
social health
.
MedlinePlus: How to Improve Mental Health
: MedlinePlus provides health information and tips for improving your mental health.
CDC: Emotional Well-Being
: CDC provides information on how to cope with stress and promote social connectedness.
SAMHSA: How to Cope
: SAMHSA offers tips for taking care of your well-being and connecting with others for support.
VA Office of Mental Health: Veteran Training
: VA offers free, confidential courses to help veterans enhance their mental health and life skills.
Last Reviewed:
April 2026
Unless otherwise specified, the information on our website and in our publications is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please
cite the National Institute of Mental Health
as the source.
Read our copyright policy
to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content.