Depression - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Depression
On this page
What is depression?
Where can I learn more about depression?
Why is NIMH studying depression?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about depression
Share outreach materials about depression
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is depression?
Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with time. Depression (also called major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is different. It can cause severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. It is an illness that can affect anyone—regardless of age, race, income, culture, or education. Research suggests that genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.
Where can I learn more about depression?
Free health information
Digital brochures and fact sheets with more information about depression, including signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Available for free in print and online.
Science updates
NIMH news about depression, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Statistics
Information about the prevalence and treatment of depression in the United States.
Why is NIMH studying depression?
Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the United States. The symptoms range from mild to severe and can disrupt a person’s ability to carry out everyday activities. It is linked to increased health care costs and other health conditions like heart disease and diabetes. It is also a risk factor for suicidal thoughts and behaviors.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH is funding and conducting research to learn more about what causes depression, how it affects the brain, and how to treat it effectively. We're working to improve existing treatments like medications, talk therapy (including telehealth and online options), and brain stimulation therapy.
We're investigating ways to identify which treatment will work best for a specific person and tailor treatments based on a person's unique characteristics and traits. We’re supporting research to develop and test therapies for people with treatment-resistant depression who don’t improve after trying multiple treatment options. We are also exploring new methods to prevent and treat depression and improve the delivery of care for people living with depression.
Explore clinical trials about depression
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on Depression
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
NIMH Depression Studies for Adults
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
NIMH Depression Studies for Children
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
Share outreach materials about depression
Digital shareables
Social media graphics, videos, and resources about depression.
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
Depression
(MedlinePlus): Information, journal articles, and other resources about depression collected by the National Library of Medicine
Get Your Teen Screened for Depression
(Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion): Information about depression in teens and what to expect from depression screening and treatment
Moms’ Mental Health Matters: Depression and Anxiety Around Pregnancy
(
Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development): Information about the signs of depression and anxiety during pregnancy or after birth and how to get help
Talk With Your Doctor About Depression
(Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion): Information about depression, how to talk to a doctor about mental health concerns, treatment options, and ways to find support
Talking Postpartum Depression
(Office on Women’s Health): Stories from women who experienced postpartum depression and resources to help find support
Last Reviewed:
December 2024