Women and Mental Health - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Women and Mental Health
Why is women’s mental health important?
Some mental disorders are more common in women than men, including
depression
,
anxiety disorders
, and
eating disorders
.
There are also disorders unique to women. For example, some women experience symptoms of depression at times of hormone change, such as:
During or after pregnancy (
perinatal depression
)
Around the time of their period (premenstrual dysphoric disorder)
During the menopause transition (perimenopausal depression)
When it comes to other mental disorders, such as
schizophrenia
and
bipolar disorder
, research has not found sex differences in the rates at which they are diagnosed. But certain symptoms may be more common in women, and the course of illness can be affected by a person’s sex. Researchers are beginning to tease apart the various biological and psychosocial factors that may impact mental health.
Mental health includes emotional, psychological, and social well-being. Learn more about
caring for your mental health
.
What are symptoms of mental disorders in women?
Some common symptoms of mental disorders include:
Persistent sadness or feelings of hopelessness
Noticeable changes in mood, energy, or appetite
Difficulty sleeping or sleeping too much
Appetite or weight changes
Misuse of alcohol, drugs, or both
Decreased energy or fatigue
Excessive fear or worry
Seeing or hearing things that are not there
Extremely high and low moods
Aches, headaches, or digestive problems without a clear cause
Anger or irritability
Social withdrawal
Thoughts or behaviors that interfere with work, family, or social life
Thoughts of death or suicide or suicide attempts
Mental disorders can be treated
:
A primary care provider is a good place to start if you’re looking for help. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out next steps. Find
tips for talking with a health care provider
about your mental health.
You can
learn more about getting help
on the NIMH website. You can also learn about
finding support
and
locating mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline
at
988
or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call
911
.
Latest news
Basic Research Powers the First Medication for Postpartum Depression
May 14, 2024
•
Feature Story
Decades of NIMH-supported basic research led to a pioneering treatment for postpartum depression and continues to power exciting advances in women's mental health care.
Intervention Reduces Likelihood of Developing Postpartum Anxiety and Depression by More Than 70%
February 27, 2024
•
Press Release
Results from a large clinical trial funded by the National Institutes of Health show that an intervention for anxiety provided to pregnant women living in Pakistan significantly reduced the likelihood of the women developing moderate-to-severe anxiety, depression, or both six weeks after birth.
Combined, High Maternal Stress and Prenatal COVID-19 Infection May Affect Attention Span in Infants
September 27, 2023
•
Media Advisory
Prenatal COVID-19 infection increased the risk for impaired attention and delayed socioemotional and cognitive functioning among infants of mothers who experienced high psychosocial stress during their pregnancy.
More related news
Health topics and resources for women
Featured health topics
Anxiety Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
Borderline Personality Disorder
Depression
Eating Disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Schizophrenia
Suicide Prevention
Featured brochures and fact sheets
More brochures and fact sheets
Federal resources
Depression Among Women
: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides information about depression among women, including risk factors for depression and postpartum depression.
Maternal Health
: The Health Resources and Services Administration has programs and resources on maternal health, including depression during and after pregnancy.
Moms’ Mental Health Matters
: The
Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development offers an action plan for depression and anxiety during pregnancy and after birth.
Maternal Morbidity & Mortality Web Portal
: The NIH Office of Research on Women's Health offers resources for maternal health across the lifespan.
Office on Women’s Health: Mental Health
: The Department of Health and Human Service’s Office on Women’s Health provides information on women’s mental health.
Women’s Health
: The National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus has resources on the unique health issues women experience (
en español
).
Health hotlines
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
: This Lifeline provides free and confidential emotional support to people in suicidal crisis or emotional distress 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, across the United States. Call or text
988
to connect with a trained crisis counselor. Support is also available via
live chat
. Para ayuda
en español, llame al 988.
National Maternal Mental Health Hotline
: This hotline offers free, confidential mental health support for moms and their families before, during, and after pregnancy. Call or text
1-833-TLC-MAMA (1-833-852-6262)
to connect with counselors 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. English- and Spanish-speaking counselors are available.
Disaster Distress Helpline
: This helpline provides immediate crisis counseling for people experiencing emotional distress related to any natural or human-caused disaster. The helpline is free, multilingual, confidential, and available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Call or text
1-800-985-5990
.
Veterans Crisis Line
: This crisis line is a free, confidential resource for veterans of all ages and circumstances. Call
988
then press 1; text
838255
; or
chat online
to connect with 24/7 support.
NIH Health Info Lines
Why should women participate in clinical trials?
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. The goal of a clinical trial is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although people may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, they should know that the primary purpose is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others can be better helped in the future.
Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct many studies with women. We have new and better treatment options today because of what clinical trials have uncovered. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.
NIMH researchers are currently working to identify the causes of, treatments for, and predictors of mood disorders unique to women, including:
Postpartum depression
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Perimenopausal depression
In addition to these disorders, NIMH researchers are also
studying other mental disorders that affect women
.
Our studies take place at the
NIH Clinical Center
in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. If you don’t live nearby, you can
find a clinical trial near you
.
Sex can influence health in important ways. You can help researchers learn more and advance health care for all people. NIMH is committed to ensuring that people have all the information they need to feel comfortable and make informed decisions before participating in a study.
Last Reviewed:
April 2024
Unless otherwise specified, the information on our website and in our publications is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please
cite the National Institute of Mental Health
as the source.
Read our copyright policy
to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content.