Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)
On this page
What is OCD?
Where can I learn more about OCD?
Why is NIMH studying OCD?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about OCD
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is OCD?
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a disorder marked by uncontrollable and recurring thoughts (obsessions), repetitive and excessive behaviors (compulsions), or both. OCD symptoms can begin any time but usually start between late childhood and young adulthood.
Where can I learn more about OCD?
Free health information
Digital brochures and fact sheets with more information about OCD, including signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Available for free in print and online.
Science updates
NIMH news about OCD, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Statistics
Information about the prevalence and treatment of OCD in the United States.
Why is NIMH studying OCD?
OCD symptoms are often time-consuming and can cause significant distress or interfere with daily life. It is common for people with OCD also to have a diagnosed mood or
anxiety disorder
. Although there is no cure for OCD, available treatments can help people manage their symptoms, participate in day-to-day activities, and improve their quality of life.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH funds and conducts research to better understand who is at risk for developing OCD. This includes research into genetics, biology, temperament, and childhood trauma, as well as studies of OCD in children and adults. We’re supporting research to improve existing treatments for OCD, including psychotherapy, medication, and brain stimulation therapy. We’re also funding research investigating new treatments, particularly for people with treatment-resistant OCD whose symptoms haven’t improved after trying multiple treatment options.
Explore clinical trials about OCD
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on OCD
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
(MedlinePlus): Information, journal articles, and other resources about OCD collected by the National Library of Medicine
Last Reviewed:
December 2024