Bipolar Disorder - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Bipolar Disorder
On this page
What is bipolar disorder?
Where can I learn more about bipolar disorder?
Why is NIMH studying bipolar disorder?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about bipolar disorder
Share outreach materials about bipolar disorder
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is bipolar disorder?
Bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depressive illness or manic depression) is a mental illness that causes clear shifts in a person’s mood, energy, activity levels, and concentration. People with bipolar disorder often experience periods of extremely “up,” elated, irritable, or energized behavior (known as manic episodes) and very “down,” sad, indifferent, or hopeless periods (known as depressive episodes).
Where can I learn more about bipolar disorder?
Free health information
Digital brochures and fact sheets with more information about bipolar disorder, including signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Available for free in print and online.
Science updates
NIMH news about bipolar disorder, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Statistics
Information about the prevalence and treatment of bipolar disorder in the United States.
Why is NIMH studying bipolar disorder?
The symptoms of bipolar disorder can impose serious challenges to a person’s mental and physical health. People with bipolar disorder often have other mental disorders, and some people may experience symptoms of
psychosis
, such as hallucinations or delusions. The symptoms can interfere with everyday activities, relationships, and work or school responsibilities. Some people may also experience stigma related to their symptoms, which can keep them from seeking the help they need.
Bipolar disorder usually requires lifelong treatment, but an effective treatment plan can help people manage their symptoms and improve their quality of life.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH supports research to understand the biological, genetic, and environmental factors that contribute to bipolar disorder. This research includes studies examining how different factors influence when bipolar disorder symptoms appear and how they change over time. Other research focuses on identifying patterns in brain activity that could help predict and track symptom progression.
NIMH also supports research to improve treatments for people with bipolar disorder. This includes research to better understand the relationship between bipolar disorder and co-occurring conditions, like
anxiety disorders
and
substance use disorders
. Understanding the relationship between these conditions could lead to more effective treatment approaches.
Explore clinical trials about bipolar disorder
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on Bipolar Disorder
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
NIMH Bipolar Disorder Studies for Adults
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
NIMH Bipolar Disorder Studies for Children
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
Share outreach materials about bipolar disorder
Digital shareables
Social media graphics, videos, and resources about bipolar disorder.
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
Bipolar Disorder
(MedlinePlus): Information, journal articles, and other resources about bipolar disorder collected by the National Library of Medicine
Last Reviewed:
December 2024