COVID-19 and Mental Health - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
COVID-19 and Mental Health
On this page
What is COVID-19?
Where can I learn more about COVID-19 and mental health?
Why is NIMH studying COVID-19 and mental health?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about COVID-19 and mental health
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is COVID-19?
COVID-19 is a disease caused by a virus named SARS-CoV-2. COVID-19 most often affects the lungs and respiratory system, but it can also affect other parts of the body. Some people develop post-COVID conditions, also called
Long COVID
. These symptoms can include neurological symptoms such as difficulty thinking or concentrating, sleep problems, and depression or anxiety.
Where can I learn more about COVID-19 and mental health?
Science updates
NIMH news about COVID-19 and mental health, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Why is NIMH studying COVID-19 and mental health?
Both SARS-CoV-2 and the COVID-19 pandemic have significantly affected the mental health of adults and children. Many people experienced symptoms of
anxiety
,
depression
, and
substance use disorder
during the pandemic. Data also suggest that people are more likely to develop mental illnesses or disorders in the months following COVID-19 infection. People with
Long COVID may experience many symptoms related to brain function and mental health
. While the COVID-19 pandemic has had widespread mental health impacts, some people are more likely to be affected than others.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH is supporting research to understand and address the impacts of the pandemic on mental health. This includes research to understand how COVID-19 affects people with existing mental illnesses across their entire lifespan. NIMH also supports research to help meet people’s mental health needs during the pandemic and beyond. This includes research focused on making mental health services more accessible through telehealth, digital tools, and community-based interventions.
NIMH is also working to understand the unique impacts of the pandemic on specific groups of people. For example, NIMH supports research investigating how pandemic-related factors, such as school disruptions, may influence children’s brain, cognitive, social, and emotional development.
Explore clinical trials about COVID-19 and mental health
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on COVID-19 and Mental Health
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
COVID-19
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention): Fact sheets, infographics, and other resources about COVID-19 signs, symptoms, and treatment options
RECOVER Initiative
(NIH): Information about the national research initiative, RECOVER, which supports research efforts to understand, diagnosis, treat, and prevent Long COVID
Last Reviewed:
December 2024