Men and Mental Health - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Men and Mental Health
Why is men’s mental health important?
Mental disorders affect men and women. The prevalence of several mental disorders is lower in men than in women. However, other disorders are diagnosed at comparable rates for men and women or at higher rates for men, like
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
. Men are also more likely to die by suicide than women, according to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
.
Certain symptoms may also be more common in men than women, and the course of illness can be affected by a person’s sex. Researchers are only now beginning to tease apart the various biological and psychosocial factors that may impact mental health.
Men are less likely to have received mental health treatment than women in the past year. Recognizing the signs that you or someone you love may have a mental disorder is the first step toward getting treatment. The earlier that treatment begins, the more effective it can be.
Mental health includes emotional, psychological, and social well-being. Learn more about
taking care of your mental health.
What are the symptoms of mental disorders in men?
Men and women can develop most of the same mental disorders and conditions, but they may experience different symptoms. Some common symptoms include:
Anger, irritability, or aggressiveness
Noticeable changes in mood, energy level, or appetite
Difficulty sleeping or sleeping too much
Difficulty concentrating, feeling restless, or on edge
Increased worry or feeling stressed
Misuse of alcohol, drugs, or both
Persistent sadness or feelings of hopelessness
Feeling flat or having trouble feeling positive emotions
Engaging in high-risk activities
Aches, headaches, or digestive problems without a clear cause
Obsessive thinking or compulsive behavior
Thoughts or behaviors that interfere with work, family, or social life
Thoughts of death or suicide or suicide attempts
Mental disorders can be treated
: A primary care provider is a good place to start if you’re looking for help. They can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychologist, psychiatrist, or clinical social worker, who can help you figure out next steps. Find
tips for talking with a health care provider
about your mental health.
You can
learn more about getting help
on the NIMH website. You can also learn about
finding support
and
locating mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline
at
988
or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call
911
.
Health topics and resources for men
Featured health topics
Anxiety Disorders
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Bipolar Disorder
Borderline Personality Disorder
Depression
Eating Disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Schizophrenia
Substance Use and Co-Occurring Mental Disorders
Suicide Prevention
Featured brochures and fact sheets
More brochures and fact sheets
Federal Resources
Men’s Health
: The National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus offers resources on the unique health issues men experience (
en español
).
Preventing Suicide Among Men in the Middle Years: Recommendations for Suicide Prevention Programs
: The Suicide Prevention Resource Center created this resource to help state and community suicide prevention programs design and implement projects to prevent suicide among men in the middle years (ages 35–64).
Why We Need to Talk About Men’s Mental Health
: This blog post from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office on Women’s Health discusses the importance of supporting men’s mental health.
Health hotlines
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
: The Lifeline provides free and confidential emotional support to people in suicidal crisis or emotional distress 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, across the United States. Call or text
988
to connect with a trained crisis counselor. Support is also available via
live chat
. Para ayuda
en español, llame al 988.
Disaster Distress Hotline
: This helpline from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides immediate crisis counseling for people experiencing emotional distress related to any natural or human-caused disaster. The helpline is free, multilingual, confidential, and available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Call or text
1-800-985-5990
.
Veterans Crisis Line
: This helpline is a free, confidential resource for veterans of all ages and circumstances. Call
988
then press 1; text
838255
; or
chat online
to connect with 24/7 support.
NIH Health Info Lines
Why should men participate in clinical trials?
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although people may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, they should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.
Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct many studies with patients and healthy volunteers. We have new and better treatment options today because of what clinical trials have uncovered.  Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.
To learn more or find a study, visit:
NIMH’s Clinical Trials webpage
: Information about participating in clinical trials
Join a Study: Adults
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH Campus in Bethesda, MD
Sex can influence health in important ways. You can help researchers learn more and advance health care for all people. NIMH is committed to ensuring that people have all the information they need to feel comfortable and make informed decisions before participating in a study.
Last Reviewed:
May 2024
Unless otherwise specified, the information on our website and in our publications is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please
cite the National Institute of Mental Health
as the source.
Read our copyright policy
to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content.