Traumatic Events and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Traumatic Events and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
On this page
What is PTSD?
Where can I learn more about PTSD?
Why is NIMH studying PTSD?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about PTSD
Share outreach materials about PTSD
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is PTSD?
People may have a range of reactions after experiencing or witnessing a traumatic event, such as a natural disaster, act of violence, or serious accident. Common reactions include feeling anxious, sad, or angry; having trouble concentrating and sleeping; and thinking about what happened.
Most people will recover from these symptoms
, and their reactions will lessen over time.
People may be diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) if their symptoms last for an extended period after a traumatic event and begin to interfere with aspects of daily life, such as relationships or work. People who have PTSD may continue to feel stressed or frightened, even though they are not in danger.
Where can I learn more about PTSD?
Free health information
Digital brochures and fact sheets with more information about PTSD, including signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Available for free in print and online.
Science updates
NIMH news about PTSD, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Statistics
Information about the prevalence and treatment of PTSD in the United States.
Why is NIMH studying PTSD?
The symptoms of PTSD can cause significant distress and interfere with a person’s ability to engage in daily activities, including sleeping and eating. People with PTSD often have co-occurring conditions, such as
depression
,
substance use
, or
anxiety disorders
.
Aspects of the traumatic event and certain biological and social factors may make some people more likely to develop PTSD. For instance, previous exposure to adversity and other traumatic experiences, especially in childhood, can increase a person’s chance of developing PTSD later in life. While many people who live through a dangerous event experience some symptoms initially, most do not develop PTSD—multiple factors play a part.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH is supporting research to understand the factors that influence a person’s mental health after a potentially traumatic event. Researchers are working to understand what causes specific PTSD symptoms and why symptoms differ in type and severity from person to person. This includes research on biological, cognitive, behavioral, and developmental factors. NIMH-supported research is also studying ways to identify which trauma survivors are likely to recover naturally and which survivors may benefit from treatment.
NIMH-supported research is also focused on developing and improving mental health treatments that can help trauma survivors. This includes research to identify treatment components that can lead to more effective medications, psychotherapies, and device-based treatments. We’re also supporting research on ways to deliver effective treatment across different settings and populations. This includes developing approaches to prevention and intervention that meet the specific needs of children, teens, and young adults.
Explore clinical trials about PTSD
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on PTSD
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
Share outreach materials about PTSD
Digital shareables
Social media graphics, videos, and resources about PTSD.
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
Medications for PTSD
(U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs): Information about effective medications for treating PTSD and considerations for evaluating treatment options
National Center for PTSD
(U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs): Information and resources for anyone interested in PTSD, including veterans and their family and friends, researchers, and health care providers. The site offers videos, apps, online programs, and other tools to help people with PTSD and their loved ones
PTSD
(MedlinePlus): Information, journal articles, and other resources about PTSD collected by the National Library of Medicine
Last Reviewed:
December 2024