Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Share Page
Menu
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
On this page
What is ADHD?
Where can I learn more about ADHD?
Why is NIMH studying ADHD?
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
Explore clinical trials about ADHD
Share outreach materials about ADHD
Find help and support
Additional federal resources
What is ADHD?
ADHD is a developmental disorder characterized by an ongoing pattern of one or more of the following types of symptoms:
Inattention, such as having difficulty paying attention, keeping on task, or staying organized
Hyperactivity, such as often moving around (including during inappropriate times), feeling restless, or talking excessively
Impulsivity, such as interrupting, intruding on others, or having trouble waiting one’s turn
It is common for people to show these behaviors some of the time. However, for people with ADHD, the behaviors are frequent and occur across multiple situations, such as at school, at home, at work, or with family and friends.
Where can I learn more about ADHD?
Free health information
Digital brochures and fact sheets with more information about ADHD, including signs, symptoms, and treatment options. Available for free in print and online.
Science updates
NIMH news about ADHD, including press releases and highlights on the latest research findings.
Statistics
Information about the prevalence and treatment of ADHD in the United States.
Why is NIMH studying ADHD?
ADHD is one of the most common disorders diagnosed in children. Symptoms begin in childhood and usually continue into the teen years and adulthood. ADHD often co-occurs with other disorders and conditions, such as conduct problems, learning disorders, sleep problems,
anxiety
, or
depression
, which can make the conditions harder to diagnose and treat.
For many people with ADHD, symptoms cause problems in daily life. Symptoms can make it hard to get things done; interfere with school, work, or other activities; and strain social relationships. Children with ADHD are at increased risk for injuries, social problems, family stress, and poor grades. Teens and adults with ADHD are more likely to engage in risky behaviors, such as substance use and unsafe sexual activity.
How is NIMH research addressing this critical topic?
NIMH supports research into the possible causes of ADHD. Researchers are investigating factors such as genes, hormones and other molecules, brain structure and activity, and prenatal and early life exposures. NIMH-supported research is also exploring the behavioral profiles of children and adults with ADHD to better diagnose and treat the disorder. This includes identifying symptoms associated with particular types of ADHD and their presentation at different ages.
We’re also supporting research on treatments, services, and interventions for people with ADHD and their families. Standard ADHD treatments include medication and psychosocial interventions, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, parent training, and school interventions. Newer treatments include neurofeedback, cognitive training, mindfulness, and neuromodulation. Researchers are looking at these treatment approaches separately and together and comparing their effectiveness for different ADHD symptoms. Additionally, researchers are exploring new technologies, like mobile apps and virtual reality, that can deliver information to people in real time to help them change their behavior.
Explore clinical trials about ADHD
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. To learn more or find a study, visit:
Clinical Trials – Information for Participants
: Answers to common questions about clinical trials, including why people might take part in a clinical trial and what they can expect
Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on ADHD
: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country
NIMH ADHD Studies for Children
: List of studies being conducted on the NIH campus in Bethesda, MD
Share outreach materials about ADHD
Digital shareables
Social media graphics, videos, and resources about ADHD.
Find help and support
Learn
how to find help
for yourself or someone else. You can also
find support
and
locate mental health services
in your area on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
at 988 or chat at
988lifeline.org
. In life-threatening situations, call 911.
Additional federal resources
ADHD
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention): Fact sheets, infographics, and other resources about ADHD signs, symptoms, and treatment options
ADHD
(MedlinePlus): Information, journal articles, and other resources about ADHD collected by the National Library of Medicine
Last Reviewed:
December 2024