Donate to Mental Health Research - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
About the Acting NIMH Director
Advisory Boards and Groups
Strategic Plan
Offices and Divisions
Budget
Careers at NIMH
Staff Directories
History
Getting to NIMH
Share Page
Donate to Mental Health Research
There are many beneficial ways to contribute to mental health research. Some people take action through volunteering, contributing to a community mental health organization, or participating in a research study. Others choose to make a difference by donating to the NIMH Gift Fund.
NIMH is the lead federal agency for research on mental disorders. Although NIMH does not solicit funds or participate in fund-raising, it is a Federally funded institution that has been authorized by the U.S. Congress to accept bequests and donations to support the mission of the Institute.
Donations to NIMH are deposited in our “Gift Fund” account, which is separate from the funding that we receive from Congress. NIMH uses donations for special projects in support of mental health and disorder research to advance the NIMH mission.
Projects Supported by the Gift Fund
The projects supported through the Gift Fund may vary from year to year, depending on the needs of the Institute. The Gift Fund may be used to:
Support and train junior scientists in mental health research.
Purchase special equipment and supplies for clinical laboratories.
Support workshops and conferences on subjects of priority importance to mental health/disorder research.
Print and distribute informative materials to educate the public about mental health and mental illnesses.
Support platforms for teens to share ways to eliminate and/or reduce mental health stigma faced by young people.
How to Donate to the Gift Fund
A contribution can be made to NIMH by sending a check or money order payable to “The National Institute of Mental Health” addressed to:
National Institute of Mental Health
Gift Fund
6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 7149, MSC 9655
Bethesda, MD 20892-9655
What to Include in the Donation Letter
We accept donations by letter. All donations are applied by the NIMH Director toward activities to support research on mental health disorders. Please be sure to include the following in your letter:
Name (contact person)
Company name (if applicable)
Street address
City, state, and zip code
Phone number (optional)
NIMH is not a private, charitable organization, but, as an agency of the United States, gifts made to NIMH are tax deductible as charitable contributions under section 170(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Potential donors should, however, consult with their tax advisors.
All donors will be acknowledged. If you choose, your donation can also be in memoriam or in honor of a special person in your life.
Memorial Donations (optional)
Please include the name of your loved one in the letter, as well as the names and addresses of the people whom you would like NIMH to acknowledge for the memorial donation.
Honorary Donations (optional)
Please write the name of the person your donation is in honor of in your letter, as well as the names and addresses of the people whom you would like NIMH to acknowledge for the honorary donation.
Wills and Trusts
If you are considering a bequest in a will, the will should show the address of the National Institute of Mental Health to avoid confusion about your intentions. Again, the will should indicate that the bequest is to be used to support the research and related activities of NIMH.
If you have any further questions, please feel free to write to the address above or call the NIMH Budget and Analytics Office at (301) 443-3704.